Here's my take.
Hamas's brutal
and inhuman attack on Israel last week
took the world by surprise.
Most importantly, and tragically,
it took the Israeli government
by surprise,
which meant a
delayed response
to the slaughter of its civilians.
But this was no black swan event.
Instead, as the scholar Amy Zegart notes,
it was a white swan,
something utterly predictable.
This is the sixth war between
Israel and Hamas in Gaza
over the last 15 years.
Israel controls
air, land and sea access to the Strip.
Israeli intelligence is supposed to have
an extensive network
of informants in Gaza.
So what happened?
We'll need time
to reach a full assessment.
But it does appear that
the Netanyahu government
was so focused
on judicial overhaul at home
and the Saudi deal abroad
that it ignored
the possibility of an upheaval in Gaza.
Despite allegedly receiving warnings
from Egypt.
Professor
Dimitri Chomsky
of Hebrew
University writes more provocatively
that for years, Netanyahu developed
and advanced
a destructive, warped
political doctrine
that held that strengthening Hamas
at the expense
of the Palestinian Authority
would be good for Israel.
This approach
divided the Palestinians, undermined
the Palestinian Authority
in the West Bank,
and made it easy for Netanyahu to claim
there was no path to a Palestinian state.
Chomsky cites a Jerusalem Post report
that at a Likud Party meeting in 2019,
Netanyahu made clear
that he supported the money
that the Qatari government
was sending to Hamas.
That way, Bibi is reported
to have said
Israel would foil
the establishment of a Palestinian state.
Tal Schneider
references the same meeting
and also notes
that most of the time
Israel policy was to treat
the Palestinian Authority
as a burden and Hamas as an asset.
Like Israel's
current finance minister once asserted,
the Netanyahu
government was pursuing
a policy
premised on the notion
that it could ignore
the Palestinian issue
and make a deal directly
with the Gulf Arabs
who were increasingly nervous
about Iran's rise in the region
and eager to tie up with Israel's
booming, technology driven economy.
The assumptions
behind that strategy exploded last week,
but there is a broader backdrop
for last week's terror attack.
For the last two decades,
the Middle East has been shaped
by Washington's actions,
above all, by the Iraq war
and the subsequent withdrawal
of American power.
The war upset the delicate balance
between Iran and the Arabs
and the Shiites and the Sunnis.
When the US toppled Saddam Hussein's
Sunni dominated government in Baghdad,
Iran gained
unprecedented influence in Iraq,
which is majority Shia.
Then began
the American retreat from the Middle East
which left a vacuum in the region
and to which many players entered
Iran, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Russia
and Israel
each trying to promote its own interests.
We think of the
world as
having been reasonably stable
for these last two decades
until Russia's 2022 invasion of Ukraine
But that is not true of the Middle East,
where the last two decades
have been particularly bloody.
Hundreds of thousands died in Iraq.
Then came the Syrian civil war,
which displaced
more than 14 million people
and killed
still more hundreds of thousands.
That was followed by a war in Yemen,
which quickly became the worst
humanitarian crisis in the world.
And in all of these crises and conflicts,
regional players have picked sides
trying to maximize their advantages
and bleed their foes.
We're seeing a worldwide contest
between the forces of order and disorder.
Russia, Iran, Hezbollah and Hamas
are trying to erode
the international system.
If Hamas
succeeds, it will encourage others,
Hezbollah, the Houthis,
to flex their muscles as well.
Defeating Hamas is a daunting challenge.
That terrorist group
is hoping
for a massive Israeli overreaction
that produces thousands
of civilian casualties
and bogs down Israeli troops.
Hamas is also hoping for the collapse
of any possible deal with Saudi Arabia.
The more brutal Israel's response,
the more likely it is
that that deal will collapse.
Israel's goal should be to respond
to Hamas
deal with the Palestinian issue
in the way
that still allows
for the resumption of negotiations
on Saudi normalization.
That is the strategic prize.
The establishment of normal relations
between Israel and Saudi
Arabia would be the severest setback
for Hamas Hezbollah and Iran.
One lesson is clear
the United States cannot walk away
from the Middle East entirely.
It can forswear military interventions
and it can recognize
the centrality of Asia.
But it needs to remain politically
and diplomatically active in the region.
American engagement
is a stabilizing force in the world.
For those unconvinced.
Look at
the emerging post-American Middle East
Go to CNN dot com slash Fareed for a link
to my Washington Post column this week.